《实用common lisp编程》第20章，特殊操作符（续）

CHAPTER 20 The Special Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
Controlling Evaluation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
Manipulating the Lexical Environment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 246
Local Flow of Control. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 248
Unwinding the Stack. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 252
Multiple Values. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256
EVAL-WHEN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 258
Other Special Operators. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 260

==========
Multiple Values
Another feature of Common Lisp that I’ve mentioned in passing—in Chapter 11, when I discussed 
GETHASH—is the ability for a single formto return multiple values. I’ll discuss it in greater detail 
now. It is, however, slightly misplaced in a chapter on special operators since the ability to 
return multiple values isn’t provided by just one or two special operators but is deeply integrated 
into the language. The operators you’ll most often use when dealing with multiple values are 
macros and functions, not special operators. But it is the case that the basic ability to get at 
multiple return values is provided by a special operator, MULTIPLE-VALUE-CALL, upon which 
the more commonly used MULTIPLE-VALUE-BINDmacro is built.
The key thing to understand about multiple values is that returning multiple values is 
quite different from returning a list—if a form returns multiple values, unless you do something specific to capture the multiple values, all but the primary valuewill be silently discarded. 
To see the distinction, consider the function GETHASH, which returns two values: the value 
found in the hash table and a boolean that’s NILwhen no value was found.If it returned those 
two values in a list, every time you called GETHASHyou’d have to take apart the list to get at the 
actual value, regardless of whether you cared about the second return value. Suppose you have 
a hash table, *h*, that contains numeric values. If GETHASHreturned a list, you couldn’t write 
something like this:
(+ (gethash 'a *h*) (gethash 'b *h*))
because +expects its arguments to be numbers, not lists. But because the multiple value mechanism silently discards the secondary return value when it’s not wanted, this form works fine.
There are two aspects to using multiple values—returning multiple values and getting at the 
nonprimary values returned by forms that return multiple values. The starting points for returning 
multiple values are the functions VALUESand VALUES-LIST. These are regular functions, not 
special operators, so their arguments are passedin the normal way. VALUEStakes a variable 
number of arguments and returns them as multiple values; VALUES-LISTtakes a single list and 
returns its elements as multiple values. In other words:
(values-list x) ≡(apply #'values x)

The mechanism by which multiple values are returned is implementation dependent just 
like the mechanism for passing arguments into functions is. Almost all language constructs 
that return the value of some subform will “pass through” multiple values, returning all the 
values returned by the subform. Thus, a function that returns the result of calling VALUESor 
VALUES-LISTwill itself return multiple values—andso will another function whose result 
comes from calling the first function. And so on.
11
But when a form is evaluated in a value position, only the primary value will be used, 
which is why the previous addition form works the way you’d expect. The special operator 
MULTIPLE-VALUE-CALLprovides the mechanism for getting your hands on the multiple values 
returned by a form. MULTIPLE-VALUE-CALLis similar to FUNCALLexcept that while FUNCALLis 
a regular function and, therefore, can see and pass ononly the primary values passed to it, 
MULTIPLE-VALUE-CALLpasses, to the function returned by its first subform, allthe values 
returned by the remaining subforms.
(funcall #'+ (values 1 2) (values 3 4))  →4
(multiple-value-call #'+ (values 1 2) (values 3 4)) →10
However, it’s fairly rare that you’ll simply wantto pass all the values returned by a function 
onto another function. More likely, you’ll want to stash the multiple values in different variables and then do something with them. The MULTIPLE-VALUE-BINDmacro, which you saw in 
Chapter 11, is the most frequently used operatorfor accepting multiple return values. Its skeleton looks like this:
(multiple-value-bind (variable*) values-form
body-form*)
The values-formis evaluated, and the multiple values it returns are bound to the variables. 
Then the body-formsare evaluated with those bindings in effect. Thus:
(multiple-value-bind (x y) (values 1 2)
(+ x y)) →3
Another macro, MULTIPLE-VALUE-LIST, is even simpler—it takes a single form, evaluates 
it, and collects the resulting multiple values intoa list. In other words,it’s the inverse of 
VALUES-LIST.
CL-USER> (multiple-value-list (values 1 2))
(1 2)
CL-USER> (values-list (multiple-value-list (values 1 2)))
1
2
11. A small handful of macros don’t pass through extra return values of the forms they evaluate. In 
particular, the PROG1macro, which evaluates a number of forms like a PROGNbefore returning the 
value of the first form, returns that form’s primary value only. Likewise, PROG2, which returns the 
value of the second of its subforms, returns only the primary value. The special operator 
MULTIPLE-VALUE-PROG1is a variant of PROG1that returns all the values returned by the first 
form. It’s a minor wart that PROG1doesn’t already behave like MULTIPLE-VALUE-PROG1, but 
neither is used often enough that it matters much. The ORand CONDmacros are also not always 
transparent to multiple values, returning only the primary value of certain subforms.

However, if you find yourself using MULTIPLE-VALUE-LISTa lot, it may be a sign that some 
function should be returning a list to start with rather than multiple values.
Finally, if you want to assign multiple values returned by a form to existing variables, you 
can use VALUESas a SETFable place. For example:
CL-USER> (defparameter *x* nil)
*X*
CL-USER> (defparameter *y* nil)
*Y*
CL-USER> (setf (values *x* *y*) (floor (/ 57 34)))
1
23/34
CL-USER> *x*
1
CL-USER> *y*
23/34
EVAL-WHEN
A special operator you’ll need to understand in order towrite certain kinds of macros is 
EVAL-WHEN. For some reason, Lisp books often treat EVAL-WHENas a wizards-only topic. But the 
only prerequisite to understanding EVAL-WHENis an understanding of how the two functions 
LOADand COMPILE-FILEinteract. And understanding EVAL-WHENwill be important as you start 
writing certain kinds of more sophisticated macros, such as the ones you’ll write in Chapters 24 
and 31.
I’ve touched briefly on the relation between LOADand COMPILE-FILEin previous chapters, 
but it’s worth reviewing again here. The job of LOADis to load a file and evaluate all the top-level 
forms it contains. The job of COMPILE-FILEis to compile a source file into a FASL file, which 
can then be loaded with LOADsuch that (load "foo.lisp")and (load "foo.fasl")are essentially equivalent.
Because LOADevaluates each form before reading the next, the side effects of evaluating 
forms earlier in the file can affect how forms later in the form are read and evaluated. For 
instance, evaluating an IN-PACKAGEform changes the value of *PACKAGE*, which will affect the 
way subsequent forms are read.12
Similarly, a DEFMACROform early in a file can define a macro 
that can then be used by code later in the file.
13
12. The reason loading a file with an IN-PACKAGEform in it has no effect on the value of *PACKAGE*
after LOADreturns is because LOADbinds *PACKAGE*to its current value before doing anything 
else. In other words, something equivalent to the following LETis wrapped around the rest of the 
code in LOAD:
(let ((*package* *package*)) ...)
Any assignment to *PACKAGE*will be to the new binding, and the old binding will be restored 
when LOADreturns. It also binds the variable *READTABLE*, which I haven’t discussed, in the 
same way.
13. In some implementations, you may beable to get away with evaluating DEFUNs that use undefined 
macros in the function body as long as the macros are defined before the function is actually 
called. But that works, if at all, only when LOADing the definitions from source, not when compiling 
with COMPILE-FILE, so in general macro definitions mustbe evaluated before they’re used.

COMPILE-FILE, on the other hand, normally doesn’t evaluate the forms it’s compiling; it’s 
when the FASL is loaded that the forms—or their compiled equivalents—will be evaluated. 
However, COMPILE-FILEmust evaluate some forms, such as IN-PACKAGEand DEFMACROforms, 
in order to keep the behavior of (load "foo.lisp")and (load "foo.fasl")consistent.
So how do macros such as IN-PACKAGEand DEFMACROwork when processed by 
COMPILE-FILE? In some pre–Common Lisp versions of Lisp, the file compiler simply knew it 
should evaluate certain macros in addition tocompiling them. Common Lisp avoided the need 
for such kludges by borrowing the EVAL-WHENspecial operator from Maclisp. This operator, as 
its name suggests, allows you to control when specific bits of code are evaluated. The skeleton 
of an EVAL-WHENform looks like this:
(eval-when (situation*)
body-form*)
There are three possible situations—:compile-toplevel, :load-toplevel, and :execute—
and which ones you specify controls when the body-formswill be evaluated. An EVAL-WHEN
with multiple situations is equivalent to several EVAL-WHENforms, one per situation, each with 
the same body code. To explain the meaning of the three situations, I’ll need to explain a bit 
about how COMPILE-FILE, which is also referred to as thefile compiler, goes about compiling 
a file.
To explain how COMPILE-FILEcompiles EVAL-WHENforms, I need to introduce a distinction between compiling top-levelforms and compiling non-top-level forms. A top-level form 
is, roughly speaking, one that will be compiled intocode that will be run when the FASL is loaded. 
Thus, all forms that appear directly at the top level of a source file are compiled as top-level 
forms. Similarly, any forms appearing directly in a top-level PROGNare compiled as top-level forms 
since the PROGNitself doesn’t doanything—it just groups together its subforms, which will be 
run when the FASL is loaded.
14
Similarly, forms appearing directly in a MACROLETor 
SYMBOL-MACROLETare compiled as top-level forms because after the compiler has expanded 
the local macros or symbol macros, there will be no remnant of the MACROLETor 
SYMBOL-MACROLETin the compiled code. Finally, the expansion of a top-level macro 
form will be compiled as a top-level form.
Thus, a DEFUNappearing at the top level of a source file is a top-level form—the code that 
defines the function and associates it with its name will run when the FASL is loaded—but the 
forms within the body of the function, which won’t run until the function is called, aren’t toplevel forms. Most forms are compiled the same when compiled as top-level and non-top-level 
forms, but the semantics of an EVAL-WHENdepend on whether it’s being compiled as a toplevel form, compiled as a non-top-level form, or simply evaluated, combined with what situations are listed in its situation list.
The situations :compile-topleveland :load-toplevelcontrol the meaning of an 
EVAL-WHENcompiled as a top-level form. When :compile-toplevelis present, the file compiler 
will evaluate the subformsat compile time. When :load-toplevelis present, it will compile the 
subforms as top-level forms. If neither of these situations is present in a top-level EVAL-WHEN, 
the compiler ignores it.
14. By contrast, the subforms in a top-level LETaren’t compiled as top-level forms because they’re 
not run directly when the FASL is loaded. They will run, but it’s in the runtime context of the 
bindings established by the LET. Theoretically, a LETthat binds no variables could be treated like 
a PROGN, but it’s not—the forms appearing in a LETare never treated as top-level forms.

When an EVAL-WHENis compiled as a non-top-level form, it’s either compiled like a PROGN, 
if the :executesituation is specified, or ignored. Similarly, an evaluated EVAL-WHEN—which 
includes top-level EVAL-WHENs in a source file processed by LOADand EVAL-WHENs evaluated 
at compile time because they appear as subforms of a top-level EVAL-WHENwith the 
:compile-toplevelsituation—is treated like a PROGNif :executeis present and ignored otherwise.
Thus, a macro such as IN-PACKAGEcan have the necessary effect at both compile time and 
when loading from sourceby expanding into an EVAL-WHENlike the following:
(eval-when (:compile-toplevel :load-toplevel :execute)
(setf *package* (find-package "PACKAGE-NAME")))
*PACKAGE*will be set at compile time because of the :compile-toplevelsituation, set 
when the FASL is loaded because of :load-toplevel, and set when the source is loaded because 
of the :execute.
There are two ways you’re most likely to use EVAL-WHEN. One is if you want to write macros 
that need to save some information at compile time to be used when generating the expansion 
of other macro forms in the same file. This typically arises with definitional macros where a 
definition early in a file can affect the code generated for a definition later in the same file. 
You’ll write this kind of macro in Chapter 24.
The other time you might need EVAL-WHENis if you want to put the definition of a macro 
and helper functions it uses in the samefile as code that uses the macro. DEFMACROalready 
includes an EVAL-WHENin its expansion so the macro definition is immediately available to be 
used later in the file. But DEFUNnormally doesn’t make function definitions available at compile 
time. But if you use a macro in the same file as it’s defined in, you need the macro andany 
functions it uses to be defined. If you wrap the DEFUNs of any helper functions used by the macro 
in an EVAL-WHENwith :compile-toplevel, the definitions will be available when the macro’s 
expansion function runs. You’ll probably want to include :load-topleveland :executeas well 
since the macros will also need the function definitions after the file is compiled and loaded or 
if you load the source instead of compiling.
Other Special Operators
The four remaining special operators, LOCALLY, THE, LOAD-TIME-VALUE, and PROGV, all allow 
you to get at parts of the underlying language that can’t be accessed any other way. LOCALLY
and THEare part of Common Lisp’s declaration system, which is used to communicate things 
to the compiler that don’t affect the meaning of your code but that may help the compiler 
generate better code—faster, clearer error messages, and so on.
15
I’ll discuss declarations 
briefly in Chapter 32.
The other two, LOAD-TIME-VALUEand PROGV, are infrequently used, and explaining the 
reason why you might ever wantto use them would take longer than explaining what they do. 
So I’ll just tell you what they do so you know they’re there. Someday you’ll hit on one of those 
rare times when they’re just the thing, and then you’ll be ready.
15. The one declaration that has an effect on the semantics of a program is the SPECIALdeclaration 
mentioned in Chapter 6.

LOAD-TIME-VALUEis used, as its name suggests, to create a value that’s determined at load 
time. When the file compiler compiles code that contains a LOAD-TIME-VALUEform, it arranges 
to evaluate the first subform once, when the FASL is loaded, and for the code containing the 
LOAD-TIME-VALUEform to refer to that value. In other words, instead of writing this:
(defvar *loaded-at* (get-universal-time))
(defun when-loaded () *loaded-at*)
you can write the following:
(defun when-loaded () (load-time-value (get-universal-time)))
In code not processed by COMPILE-FILE, LOAD-TIME-VALUEis evaluated once when the 
code is compiled, which may be when you explicitly compile a function with COMPILEor earlier 
because of implicit compilation performed by the implementation in the course of evaluating 
the code. In uncompiled code, LOAD-TIME-VALUEevaluates its form eachtime it’s evaluated.
Finally, PROGVcreates new dynamic bindings for variables whose names are determined at 
runtime. This is mostly usefulfor implementing embedded interpreters for languages with 
dynamically scoped variables. The basic skeleton is as follows:
(progv symbols-list values-list
body-form*)
where symbols-listis a form that evaluates to a list of symbols and values-listis a form that evaluates to a list of values. Each symbol is dynamically bound to the corresponding value, and 
then the body-formsare evaluated. The difference between PROGVand LETis that because 
symbols-listis evaluated at runtime, the names of the variables to bind can be determined 
dynamically. As I say, this isn’t something you need to do often.
And that’s it for special operators. In the next chapter, I’ll get back to hard-nosed practical 
topics and show you how to use Common Lisp’s package system to take control of your 
namespaces so you can write libraries and applications that can coexist without stomping on 
each other’s names.
