（hxzon学习笔记）PostgreSQL 9.4beta1 Documentation-Chapter 7. Queries-3，select，组合查询，排序

注释by hxzon
====
7. Queries
7.1. Overview
7.2. Table Expressions

7.3. Select Lists
7.4. Combining Queries
7.5. Sorting Rows
7.6. LIMIT and OFFSET
7.7. VALUES Lists

7.8. WITH Queries (Common Table Expressions)

====
7.3. Select Lists

7.3.1. Select-List Items
7.3.2. Column Labels 列标签（列别名）
7.3.3. DISTINCT 去除重复

7.4. Combining Queries 组合（并集，交集，差集）
7.5. Sorting Rows 排序
7.6. LIMIT and OFFSET 分页
7.7. VALUES Lists 值列表

====
7.3. Select Lists

As shown in the previous section, the table expression in the SELECT command constructs an intermediate virtual table 
by possibly combining tables, views, eliminating rows, grouping, etc. 
This table is finally passed on to processing by the select list. 
The select list determines which columns of the intermediate table are actually output.

7.3.1. Select-List Items

The simplest kind of select list is * which emits all columns that the table expression produces. 
Otherwise, a select list is a comma-separated list of value expressions (as defined in Section 4.2). 
For instance, it could be a list of column names:

SELECT a, b, c FROM ...

The columns names a, b, and c are either the actual names of the columns of tables referenced in the FROM clause, 
or the aliases given to them as explained in Section 7.2.1.2. 
The name space available in the select list is the same as in the WHERE clause, 
unless grouping is used, in which case it is the same as in the HAVING clause.

If more than one table has a column of the same name, the table name must also be given, as in:

SELECT tbl1.a, tbl2.a, tbl1.b FROM ...

When working with multiple tables, it can also be useful to ask for all the columns of a particular table:

SELECT tbl1.*, tbl2.a FROM ...

(See also Section 7.2.2.)

If an arbitrary value expression is used in the select list, 
it conceptually adds a new virtual column to the returned table. 
The value expression is evaluated once for each result row, 
with the row's values substituted for any column references. 
But the expressions in the select list do not have to reference any columns in the table expression of the FROM clause; 
they can be constant arithmetic expressions, for instance.

7.3.2. Column Labels

The entries in the select list can be assigned names for subsequent processing, 
such as for use in an ORDER BY clause or for display by the client application. 
For example:

SELECT a AS value, b + c AS sum FROM ...

If no output column name is specified using AS, the system assigns a default column name. 
For simple column references, this is the name of the referenced column. 
For function calls, this is the name of the function. 
For complex expressions, the system will generate a generic name.

The AS keyword is optional, but only if the new column name does not match any PostgreSQL keyword (see Appendix C). 
To avoid an accidental match to a keyword, you can double-quote the column name. 
For example, VALUE is a keyword, so this does not work:
可以使用双引号，从而避免列名和关键字冲突。

SELECT a value, b + c AS sum FROM ...

but this does:

SELECT a "value", b + c AS sum FROM ...

For protection against possible future keyword additions, 
it is recommended that you always either write AS or double-quote the output column name.
为了避免未来与关键字冲突，建议列名始终使用双引号。

Note: The naming of output columns here is different from that done in the FROM clause (see Section 7.2.1.2). 
It is possible to rename the same column twice, 
but the name assigned in the select list is the one that will be passed on.

====
7.3.3. DISTINCT
去除重复行

After the select list has been processed, 
the result table can optionally be subject to the elimination of duplicate rows. 
The DISTINCT key word is written directly after SELECT to specify this:

SELECT DISTINCT select_list ...

(Instead of DISTINCT the key word ALL can be used to specify the default behavior of retaining all rows.)
可以使用关键字all来表明不去除重复的行。

Obviously, two rows are considered distinct if they differ in at least one column value. 
Null values are considered equal in this comparison.
null在这里视为相同的。

Alternatively, an arbitrary expression can determine what rows are to be considered distinct:
可以给distinct指定表达式，表达式值相同的行，视为重复。（hxzon：注意）

SELECT DISTINCT ON (expression [, expression ...]) select_list ...

Here expression is an arbitrary value expression that is evaluated for all rows. 
A set of rows for which all the expressions are equal are considered duplicates, 
and only the first row of the set is kept in the output. 
Note that the "first row" of a set is unpredictable unless the query is sorted on enough columns 
to guarantee a unique ordering of the rows arriving at the DISTINCT filter. 
(DISTINCT ON processing occurs after ORDER BY sorting.)

The DISTINCT ON clause is not part of the SQL standard
distinct on子句非sql标准，且被认为不是好的使用风格。 
and is sometimes considered bad style because of the potentially indeterminate nature of its results. 
With judicious use of GROUP BY and subqueries in FROM, 
this construct can be avoided, but it is often the most convenient alternative.

====
7.4. Combining Queries
组合查询
http://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.4/static/queries-union.html

The results of two queries can be combined using the set operations union, intersection, and difference.
合并，交集，差集。 
The syntax is

query1 UNION [ALL] query2
query1 INTERSECT [ALL] query2
query1 EXCEPT [ALL] query2

query1 and query2 are queries that can use any of the features discussed up to this point. 
Set operations can also be nested and chained, for example

query1 UNION query2 UNION query3

which is executed as:

(query1 UNION query2) UNION query3

UNION effectively appends the result of query2 to the result of query1 
(although there is no guarantee that this is the order in which the rows are actually returned). 
Furthermore, it eliminates duplicate rows from its result, in the same way as DISTINCT, unless UNION ALL is used.
默认情况下，并集，交集，差集都会去除重复的行，除非使用all关键字。

INTERSECT returns all rows that are both in the result of query1 and in the result of query2. 
Duplicate rows are eliminated unless INTERSECT ALL is used.

EXCEPT returns all rows that are in the result of query1 but not in the result of query2. 
(This is sometimes called the difference between two queries.) 
Again, duplicates are eliminated unless EXCEPT ALL is used.

In order to calculate the union, intersection, or difference of two queries, 
the two queries must be "union compatible", 
which means that they return the same number of columns 
and the corresponding columns have compatible data types, as described in Section 10.5.
各个集合的列数必须相同，且各列的数据类型兼容。

====
7.5. Sorting Rows
排序

After a query has produced an output table (after the select list has been processed) it can optionally be sorted. 
If sorting is not chosen, the rows will be returned in an unspecified order. 
The actual order in that case will depend on the scan and join plan types and the order on disk, but it must not be relied on. 
A particular output ordering can only be guaranteed if the sort step is explicitly chosen.

The ORDER BY clause specifies the sort order:

SELECT select_list
    FROM table_expression
    ORDER BY sort_expression1 [ASC | DESC] [NULLS { FIRST | LAST }]
             [, sort_expression2 [ASC | DESC] [NULLS { FIRST | LAST }] ...]

The sort expression(s) can be any expression that would be valid in the query's select list.
sort子句可以使用表达式，如下：（hxzon：注意） 
An example is:

SELECT a, b FROM table1 ORDER BY a + b, c;

When more than one expression is specified, 
the later values are used to sort rows that are equal according to the earlier values. 
Each expression can be followed by an optional ASC or DESC keyword 
to set the sort direction to ascending or descending. 
ASC order is the default. 
Ascending order puts smaller values first, where "smaller" is defined in terms of the < operator. 
Similarly, descending order is determined with the > operator. [1]

The NULLS FIRST and NULLS LAST options can be used 
to determine whether nulls appear before or after non-null values in the sort ordering. 
By default, null values sort as if larger than any non-null value; 
that is, NULLS FIRST is the default for DESC order, and NULLS LAST otherwise.
可以使用nulls first或nulls last，来决定null值的位置。
默认情况下，null值视为比非null值大。
所以默认情况下，升序时null值在后，降序时null值在前。

Note that the ordering options are considered independently for each sort column. 
For example ORDER BY x, y DESC means ORDER BY x ASC, y DESC, 
which is not the same as ORDER BY x DESC, y DESC.

A sort_expression can also be the column label or number of an output column, as in:

SELECT a + b AS sum, c FROM table1 ORDER BY sum;

SELECT a, max(b) FROM table1 GROUP BY a ORDER BY 1;

上述的1指的是列位置。

both of which sort by the first output column. 
Note that an output column name has to stand alone, that is, 
it cannot be used in an expression — for example, this is not correct:
可以使用单独的列别名排序，但是列别名不能出现在order的表达式中。

SELECT a + b AS sum, c FROM table1 ORDER BY sum + c;          -- wrong

This restriction is made to reduce ambiguity. 
There is still ambiguity if an ORDER BY item is a simple name 
that could match either an output column name or a column from the table expression. 
The output column is used in such cases. 
This would only cause confusion if you use AS to rename an output column 
to match some other table column's name.

ORDER BY can be applied to the result of a UNION, INTERSECT, or EXCEPT combination, 
but in this case it is only permitted to sort by output column names or numbers, not by expressions.

Notes

[1]	
Actually, PostgreSQL uses the default B-tree operator class for the expression's data type 
to determine the sort ordering for ASC and DESC. 
Conventionally, data types will be set up so that the < and > operators correspond to this sort ordering, 
but a user-defined data type's designer could choose to do something different.

====
7.6. LIMIT and OFFSET
分页

LIMIT and OFFSET allow you to retrieve just a portion of the rows that are generated by the rest of the query:

SELECT select_list
    FROM table_expression
    [ ORDER BY ... ]
    [ LIMIT { number | ALL } ] [ OFFSET number ]

If a limit count is given, no more than that many rows will be returned 
(but possibly less, if the query itself yields less rows). 
LIMIT ALL is the same as omitting the LIMIT clause.

OFFSET says to skip that many rows before beginning to return rows. 
OFFSET 0 is the same as omitting the OFFSET clause, 
and LIMIT NULL is the same as omitting the LIMIT clause. 
If both OFFSET and LIMIT appear, then OFFSET rows are skipped before starting to count the LIMIT rows that are returned.

When using LIMIT, it is important to use an ORDER BY clause that constrains the result rows into a unique order. 
Otherwise you will get an unpredictable subset of the query's rows. 
You might be asking for the tenth through twentieth rows, 
but tenth through twentieth in what ordering? 
The ordering is unknown, unless you specified ORDER BY.

The query optimizer takes LIMIT into account when generating query plans, 
so you are very likely to get different plans (yielding different row orders) 
depending on what you give for LIMIT and OFFSET. 
Thus, using different LIMIT/OFFSET values to select different subsets of a query result 
will give inconsistent results unless you enforce a predictable result ordering with ORDER BY. 
This is not a bug; 
it is an inherent consequence of the fact that SQL does not promise to deliver the results of a query in any particular order 
unless ORDER BY is used to constrain the order.

The rows skipped by an OFFSET clause still have to be computed inside the server; 
therefore a large OFFSET might be inefficient.
即便offset子句表示跳过，但服务器内部仍然必须计算这些跳过的行。

====
7.7. VALUES Lists
值列表

VALUES provides a way to generate a "constant table" 
that can be used in a query without having to actually create and populate a table on-disk. 
The syntax is

VALUES ( expression [, ...] ) [, ...]

Each parenthesized list of expressions generates a row in the table. 
The lists must all have the same number of elements (i.e., the number of columns in the table), 
and corresponding entries in each list must have compatible data types. 
The actual data type assigned to each column of the result is determined 
using the same rules as for UNION (see Section 10.5).

As an example:

VALUES (1, 'one'), (2, 'two'), (3, 'three');

will return a table of two columns and three rows. 
It's effectively equivalent to:

SELECT 1 AS column1, 'one' AS column2
UNION ALL
SELECT 2, 'two'
UNION ALL
SELECT 3, 'three';

By default, PostgreSQL assigns the names column1, column2, etc. to the columns of a VALUES table. 
The column names are not specified by the SQL standard and different database systems do it differently, 
so it's usually better to override the default names with a table alias list, like this:
建议给值列表中的列取别名。

=> SELECT * FROM (VALUES (1, 'one'), (2, 'two'), (3, 'three')) AS t (num,letter);
 num | letter
-----+--------
   1 | one
   2 | two
   3 | three
(3 rows)

Syntactically, VALUES followed by expression lists is treated as equivalent to:

SELECT select_list FROM table_expression

and can appear anywhere a SELECT can.
值列表可以出现在select能出现的任何地方。 
For example, you can use it as part of a UNION, or attach a sort_specification 
(ORDER BY, LIMIT, and/or OFFSET) to it. 
它可作为union的一部分，也可对它使用order by，limit等。
VALUES is most commonly used as the data source in an INSERT command, 
and next most commonly as a subquery.

For more information see VALUES.

