（hxzon学习笔记）api

====
1，伸缩性

void org.zkoss.zk.ui.HtmlBasedComponent.setVflex(String flex)

Sets vertical flexibility hint of this component. 

（flexibility，n.柔韧性，机动性，灵活性；伸缩性；可塑度；柔度）
设置此组件的垂直伸缩性提示。

Number flex indicates how this component's container distributes remaining empty space among its children vertically. 
数字值，决定了容器如何分配多余的垂直空间。
Flexible component grow and shrink to fit their given space. 
可伸缩组件会伸展或缩小来使用给它们的空间。
Flexible components with larger flex values will be made larger than components with lower flex values, 
at the ratio determined by all flexible components. 
根据比例来分配剩余空间。
The actual flex value is not relevant unless there are other flexible components within the same container. 
Once the default sizes of components in a container are calculated, 
the remaining space in the container is divided among the flexible components, according to their flex ratios.
先计算组件默认的尺寸，剩余的空间按伸缩值的比例分配。

Specify a flex value of negative value, 0, or "false" has the same effect as leaving the flex attribute out entirely. 
Specify a flex value of "true" has the same effect as a flex value of 1.
设置为”true“等同于”1“。

Special flex hint, "min", indicates that the minimum space shall be given to this flexible component to enclose all of its children components. 
That is, the flexible component grow and shrink to fit its children components.
特殊值”min“，意味着分配给此组件最小空间，即它的尺寸，恰好适应它的子组件。

Parameters:
flex the vertical flex hint.
Since:
5.0.0

=========
2，客户端特效

void org.zkoss.zk.ui.HtmlBasedComponent.setAction(String action)


Sets the client-side action (CSA). 

Default: null (no CSA at all) 

The format: 
action1: action-effect1; action2: action-effect2


Currently, only two actions are show and hide. 
They are called when the widget is becoming visible (show) and invisible (hide). 
目前只有”显示“和”隐藏“两种动作。

The action effect (action-effect1) is the name of a method defined in zk.eff.Actions, 
such as show: slideDown; hide: slideUp 

You could specify the effects as follows:
show: slideDown({duration:1000}) 

Security Tips: the action is not encoded and it is OK to embed JavaScript, 
so, if you want to allow users to specify the action, you have to encode it. 

Note for developers upgraded from ZK 3: CSA's format is different and limited. 
In additions, it is part of HtmlBasedComponent.

Parameters:
action 
Since:
5.0.6

========
3，box布局：对齐

（hxzon：布局功能是如何实现的？未在java代码见到）

String org.zkoss.zul.Box.getAlign()


Returns the alignment of cells of a box in the 'opposite' direction (null, start, center, end). 
描述在另一个方向上的对齐方式。（参见getPack）

Default: start

The align attribute specifies how child elements of the box are aligned, 
when the size of the box is larger than the total size of the children. 
当box的尺寸大于所有子组件的尺寸总和时，指定如何对齐。
For boxes that have horizontal orientation, it specifies how its children will be aligned vertically. 
For boxes that have vertical orientation, it is used to specify how its children are aligned horizontally. 
The pack attribute (getPack) is related to the alignment but is used to specify the position in the opposite direction. 

start 
Child elements are aligned starting from the left or top edge of the box. 
If the box is larger than the total size of the children, the extra space is placed on the right or bottom side. 
剩余空间放在右边或底部。

center 
Extra space is split equally along each side of the child elements, 
resulting in the children being placed in the center of the box. 
剩余空间平均放在两边。

end 
Child elements are placed on the right or bottom edge of the box. 
If the box is larger than the total size of the children, the extra space is placed on the left or top side. 
剩余空间在左边或顶部。

stretch(since 5.0) 
Child elements are stretched to fill the box. 
子组件被拉伸，填充剩余空间。

Since:
3.0.0

=======
4，

String org.zkoss.zul.Box.getPack()


Returns the pack alignment of cells of this box (start, center, end) plus an indication stretch option. 

Default: start. 

The pack attribute specifies where child elements of the box are placed 
when the box is larger that the size of the children. 
当box的尺寸大于子组件的尺寸时，子组件如何放置。
For boxes with horizontal orientation, it is used to indicate the position of children horizontally. 
当水平布局时，它决定了子组件的水平位置。
For boxes with vertical orientation, it is used to indicate the position of children vertically. 
The align attribute (getAlign)is used to specify the position in the opposite direction. 
align描述的是另一个方向上的位置。

start 
Child elements are aligned starting from the left or top edge of the box. 
If the box is larger than the total size of the children, the Extra space is placed on the right or bottom side. 

center 
Extra space is split equally along each side of the child elements, 
resulting in the children being placed in the center of the box. 

end 
Child elements are placed on the right or bottom edge of the box. 
If the box is larger than the total size of the children, the extra space is placed on the left or top side. 

stretch(since 5.0) 
This is an extra option in addition to the (start, center, end) options. 
When add this extra option in the pack attribute, the Extra space is placed proportionally and evenly along each child elements. 
If you specify "stretch,start", then the Extra proportionally and evenly allocated space for each child 
is placed on the right or bottom side of the child. 
If you specify "stretch,center", then the Extra proportionally and evenly allocated space for each child 
is split equally along each side of the child. 
If you specify "stretch,end", then the Extra proportionally and evenly allocated space for each child 
is placed on the left or top side of the child. 
Note that if there are Splitter child inside this Box, then this Box behaves as if the pack attribute has been set the "stretch" option; 
如果带有”分割器“，则始终带有”伸缩“选项。
no matter you really specify "stretch" in pack attribute or not. 
If you give null to the pack attribute, it is the same as "start". 
If simply give "stretch" to this pack attribute then it is the same as "stretch,start" 

Since:
3.0.0

======
5，

void org.zkoss.zul.Box.setSizedByContent(boolean byContent)


Sets whether sizing the cell's size by its content. 

Default: true. It means the cell's size is depended on its content. 

With Splitter, you can specify the sizedByContent to be false for resizing smoothly, if it contains a grid or other sophisticated components.

Parameters:
byContent 
Since:
5.0.4

======
6，锚点布局

void org.zkoss.zul.Anchorchildren.setAnchor(String anchor)

Sets the width, height relative to parent, anchorlayout. 
It can use % or number. 
可以使用具体数值，或百分比。
Accept one argument, or two argument separated by space. 
支持一个参数，或两个参数，两个参数之间通过空格分隔。
The first argument is for width, and second for height. 
第一个参数是宽，第二个参数是高。
For example, 
"50% 50%" means the anchorchildren width and height is 50% of Anchorlayout. 
"-30 20%" means the width is 20px less than parent, and height is 20% of parent. 
"50%" means the width is 50% of parent, and the height is no assumed. 

Parameters:
anchor 

==
org.zkoss.zul.Anchorlayout

An anchorlayout lays out a container which can resize it's children base on its width and height
当本组件尺寸改变时，子组件会调整尺寸。

Default getZclass: z-anchorlayout.

Since:
6.0.0
Author:
peterkuo



